A statistician with 2+ years of experience in statistical modeling, BI reporting, data mining,
 data visualization on structured and unstructured data to derive meaningful business insight.
 Technology stack:  R programming (R-markdown and Notebook) SPSS, STATA, Python, and SAS.
 I look forward to a fruitful transaction, feel free to contact me. 

Machine learning engineer, having completed 2 data science capstone projects on IBM, cloud.
Accolades from Oracle University include a Data Integration certified Associate.  
Passionate about machine learning and Artificial intelligence.
I look forward to a fruitful transaction, feel free to contact me.

A Data Engineer with 2 years of experience in data extraction, enrichment, transformation and 
data modeling (ETL) technologies. Skilled in Oracle and Microsoft SQL databases. 
Conversant with Oracle, IBM and Azure cloud. 
Accomplishments:
-Oracle cloud platform Data Integration 2018 Certified Associate
-IBM Data Science professional certificate 
-IBM Advanced Data science certificate 
Technology stack:R, Python, SQL, Oracle data Integrator (ODI), Oracle database
I look forward to a fruitful transaction, feel free to contact me.

A machine learning engineer with 2 years of experience in application of structured and unstructured data
to derive predictive business insight with application of analytics in problem solving.
I perform exploratory data analysis, data mining, and machine learning as part of data science experience
in real life projects. Technology stack: python:(scikit learn,keras,nltk and tensorflow),
 R:(caret,rpart,randomForest,nnet,e1071,kernlab) 
I look forward to a fruitful transaction, feel free to contact me.

As a Statistician, I apply data processing and predictive modeling techniques to derive 
competitive business insight from data. As a Data Integration Associate, 
I  leverage powerful ETL tools (ODI and SSIS) to integrate data from Excel files, Text files,
Oracle and SQL Server databases into either Oracle or Azure data warehouses.  
I am a machine learning practitioner conversant with Classification, Regression and Clustering methods.
Programming Tools: R and Python 
Databases: Oracle and Microsoft SQL server
ETL Tools: Oracle Data Integrator (ODI), SQL Server Integration Services (SSIS)
Visualization Tools: Tableau, Power BI, Oracle data visualization for desktop  


 





